---
title: "TEST"
published: false
tags: python advent-code-2021
description: "solutions to advent of code 2021 in python"
---

_tldr; all the solutions are in this [repo](https://github.com/chuanfuyap/adventcode/tree/main/2021) in jupyter-notebook format marked by their days_

_updated 17-12-2021 for day 10's solution_

# It's puzzle time
While I have been coding for many years, I have not joined the advent of code before. The reason for this was that I know it would be a very time consuming endeavour (and it is). I have done some odd coding challenge on [hackerrank](https://www.hackerrank.com) (though mind you, it was not geared towards employment like it is now when I did them), which was how I know how coding challenges can really take up your schedule while being fun, like any hobby would. 

However this year, in a new environment, my new peers suggested we try a few together. So we did, and since I have already started, I feel the need to finish it, I'll be slow at it given how busy I am trying to finish off work before... well Christmas. But I'll most definitely finish it and post all my solutions. 

So a little background of me so you can understand why I approach the puzzles the way I do. While I have been programming in Python before the data science boom, it was really after joining the data science crowd via a bootcamp that I went full pythonista. And my current work can also be branded as "health data science" so my toolkit is all data science related, which includes [pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org) and [numpy](https://numpy.org) and many more but I highlight these two cause I have used them a lot in my solutions. With my origin story out of the way, let the games begin! _Oh by the way, I don't enjoy playing code golf (writing as little lines as possible), so if that's you're here for, I am sorry._

PS: IF you came before Christmas day and see lots of unfinished puzzles, I'll be updating this blog as I solve the them, so please come back if you would like to see my solutions. 
